# how to extract first consonant vowel (CV) sequence:

1) Drag stimulus001-stimulus011 into the Praat icon. You should see the 11 items appear as "Objects"

2) Click on one of the stimulus objects, and then click "Annotate -" on the left menu. Select "To TextGrid..."

3) In the box that appears, type "CV" in both the top and bottom input editors, then hit OK

4) In the Praat Objects menu, highlight the TextGrid and one of the stimulus objects together, and then click "View & Edit"

5) You should see the sound wave appear. Add a tier to the annotation by clicking Tier > Add interval tier > OK (no need to change position or add a name)

6) In the white box at the top that contains the spectogram of the sound, click to mark the CV boundary. This may take a few attempts. To hear what you have selected, click on the light brown box, third from the bottom, that tells you how many milliseconds long your selection is

7) Once happy with where you have marked the CV boundary, click Boundary > Add on selected tier. You will see another box appear, with a number "2" by the side, and a blue line where you marked the boundary

8) Click on the left hand side of the blue boundary, so that the left portion becomes yellow. Here type "CV".

9) Save the TextGrid by selecting File > Save TextGrid as text file. Name the file as the number of the item, underscore, the target phoneme and then the deviant phoneme (e.g., 1_TP.TextGrid, 1_PT.TextGrid...). Then, close the spectogram window.

10) Remove the TextGrid object that is in the Praat Objects window by clicking on it, and then clicking 'remove' at the bottom. Then, drag the TextGrid you just saved to disk into the Praat icon so that it  pops up in “Objects” instead.

11) In the Praat Objects menu, select the new TextGrid object and one of the Sound stimulus items. Again, click "View & Edit" to pull up the spectogram window. This should look the same as the window you saved the TextGrid from

12) Play the sound before the boundary to make sure it is what you expected. (As you go through the .wav files, you may need to adjust the position of the boundary slightly, as the length of the CV portion is likely to change along the continuum)

13) Save the sound before the boundary by clicking on where the text says CV (the box should turn yellow), then File > Save selected sound as .wav file

14) The file name should be the number of the stimuli, the name of the standard sound (e.g., pai, pah, poh, pee...), then and underscore and then the name of the deviant sound (e.g., tai, tah, toh, tee...), then the number of the continuum. For example: 1_pai_tai_1.wav, 2_pah_tah_1.wav, 3_poh_toh_5.wav, 4_tee_pee_9.wav

15) Save all 11 versions of the sound, making sure to use the correct numbering of the continuum